JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: screening
for cervical cancer in places
where the disease rarely
gets priority, amid
other pressing problems.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro has a report on one
effort to prevent a disease
that afflicts about 500,000
women across the world every
year, but has the most deadly
outcomes in India.
It's part of his ongoing
series Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In a village
just outside Lucknow, India,
recently, there was a rare
opportunity for many women
like 35-year-old Kiran Rawat.
For the first time in her
life, she saw a doctor.
Her timing couldn't be better.
WOMAN (through translator):
There are some white spots
that I found when I applied the
medicine.
It's nothing to be afraid of.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
white spots are lesions.
If left untreated, they can
lead to cervical cancer in
women usually between 30 and 60
years old.
It is preventable and
treatable if detected early.
Yet, more than half the cases
worldwide are fatal, the vast
majority of them in developing
countries.
In India, cervical cancer claims
almost 70,000 lives a year,
more than anywhere else in the
world.
That's because, for millions
of women here, seeing a doctor
is the last resort, an often
unaffordable luxury.
But a pilot program run by the
global nonprofit Population
Services International, or PSI,
aimed to change that.
The organization set up medical
screening camps in Uttar
Pradesh, India's most populous
and one of its most
impoverished state.
Sixty women came to this one.
Four tested positive for
the pre-cancerous lesions
DR.
UMA SINGH, India: Pick
up a nice ball of cotton,
dip it in freshly made
acetic acid solution.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
In rich countries, Pap
smears and follow-up
treatment are the standard,
but that's neither affordable
nor practical here.
Instead, obstetrics professor
Uma Singh demonstrated
to students a low-tech,
low-cost alternative
being used in the pilot,
a simple swab of the
cervix with vinegar.
DR.
UMA SINGH: So, after one minute,
what you do is, do -- do the
inspection with good light.
So, if you see a white area,
you treat it by a procedure
which is called cryotherapy.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Literally freezing it off.
DR.
UMA SINGH: Yes, that's the
right word, freezing it off.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
lesions are a virus called HPV.
The patient can't see or
feel it, and the immune
system usually fights it off.
However, about one in every
100 infections turns cancerous.
Vaccines are available
and have proven effective
in preventing HPV.
But the cost puts them out of
reach of most Indian women.
DR.
SMITHA SINGH, India (through
translator): Don't be afraid.
I will remove them.
It's a very simple
thing, just 10 minutes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
approach here is to remove
any lesions right away.
There's no time or resources
to monitor or biopsy, no
assurance the women will return
for follow-up treatment.
It is likely that in many,
if not most cases, you are
over-treating the patient.
DR.
UMA SINGH: Yes, it may be a
little bit of over-treating,
but it has been seen that it
doesn't produce any substantial
harm to the woman in relation
to producing any long-term
effects on the cervix.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But, often,
women who test positive are
scared off by the prospect
of cryotherapy.
DR.
SMITHA SINGH: They feel a
big treatment will be done.
And at times, they do not
give consent for the cryo.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: PSI
canvasser Pinky Rawat says that
happens for a simple reason.
PINKY RAWAT, Population
Services International
(through translator):
They hear the word cancer
and they say, if I do have
cancer, what can I do?
They get very scared
when they hear cancer.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But even
as there's fear of cancer,
getting women to the screening
was a tough sell.
These women complained
that they need help for
far more mundane health
care issues, which
no one provides.
WOMAN (through translator):
My legs hurt all the time.
Give me something for my gout.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Many women
labor in the field and in
households struggling to get
by, and they neglect
their own health.
SONI GUPTA, Population
Services International
(through translator):
It's affected my own
family.
It's been three months
since my mother died.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: PSI worker
Soni Gupta says early screening
and treatment might have
saved her mother, who
died from cervical cancer.
SONI GUPTA (through
translator): I feel terrible.
Even though I work in this field
for women, my own mother died.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Of the
four women who tested positive
for the pre-cancerous lesions,
the social workers the next
morning were able to find just
one willing to go in and get
treated.
WOMAN (through
translator): I'm afraid.
I have four children.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It was
Kiran Rawat who needed a lot
of coaxing and reassurance by
a PSI outreach worker.
WOMAN (through translator):
There's nothing to worry about.
It will just take a few minutes.
And you have my phone number.
You can call me for anything.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A few
minutes later, accompanied
by her husband, they
were on the way to Dr.
Smitha Singh's clinic.
Soon, the 10-minute
procedure was done.
WOMAN (through translator):
I was afraid at first.
But, today, no problems, right?
WOMAN (through translator):
No problem today, but I
didn't sleep all night.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The hope is
that she will help spread the
word and a culture of preventive
care, says Dr. Uma Singh.
DR.
UMA SINGH: So, it is
like motivating them to
go for the checkup for
prevention of cancer,
for hypertension, for diabetes,
for anemia and multiple things.
Then you have to ensure
that there have to
be good facilities.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That much
larger job of building a better
public health system will
take time, but PSI says
its screening program
is set to scale up.
The state government has begun
to train workers to offer it in
all public health clinics based
on results in the pilot,
which concluded in January.
Seven thousand cases
were positive for the
pre-cancerous lesions.
About two-thirds of these
women had them removed.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
this is Fred de Sam Lazaro
outside Lucknow, India.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at University
of St. Thomas in Minnesota.